docs: user actions conceptual guide (#2223)
FusionAuth/fusionauth-site: site/docs/v1/tech/guides/user-actions.adoc

---
layout: doc
title: User Actions
description: Using user actions
navcategory: developer
---
:page-liquid:

> 

Reviewer: Please add a link to this guide to the API pages:

https://fusionauth.io/docs/v1/tech/apis/actioning-users

and 

https://fusionauth.io/docs/v1/tech/apis/user-actions

image::tutorials/user-actions/user-actions-edit-email.png[Setting up email configuration for user action, width=1200px]

If the User Action is not [uielement]#Time-based#, you can define a series of [uielement]#Options# associated with it. Admins can select an option when taking an action and they will be included in the Webhook event and available to the email template. You can also localize the options and the localized version will be included in both places as well.

image::tutorials/user-actions/user-actions-edit-options.png[Defining an option and adding a localization to it, width=1200px, role=bottom-cropped]

You can also add [uielement]#Localization# for the name of the User Action itself.

image::tutorials/user-actions/user-actions-edit-localization.png[Adding a localization to the name of the User Action, width=1200px, role=bottom-cropped]

You can refer to the link:/docs/v1/tech/apis/actioning-users[User Action event guide] for a full description of User Action event parameters.

> == Creating an API key

Reviewer: I love that idea.

  --data-raw '{
  "userAction": {
     "name": "Bought Temporary Access",
     "startEmailTemplateId": "5eaf58e7-2e5a-4eea-94b8-74a707724f7b",
     "endEmailTemplateId": "18490dc2-b3d4-462f-9a8e-882b4fb4e76f",
     "modifyEmailTemplateId": "2011460f-bd11-4134-ba8a-9d4c6c4a23ae",
     "cancelEmailTemplateId": "981a1ecf-4a1d-44b8-8211-3215cb80319f",
     "temporal": true,
     "userEmailingEnabled": true,
     "sendEndEvent": true
   }
  }'
----

Here, `<YOUR_FUSIONAUTH_BASE_URL>` would be the URL of the FusionAuth instance and `<YOUR API KEY>` would be the API key noted earlier. Note that the email template Ids are included in the command. Read more about link:/docs/v1/tech/email-templates/configure-email[setting up email in FusionAuth here] and link:/docs/v1/tech/email-templates/email-templates[email templates in FusionAuth here].

If you set the [field]#temporal# attribute to `true`, you can set an [field]#expiry# time for an action. This means that the action will automatically be removed from the user after the set expiry time. In this example, the [field]#sendEndEvent# field is set to `true` so that the user is notified via webhook when the access period has expired.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also use any of our link:/docs/v1/tech/client-libraries/[client libraries] to make these API calls, but to keep this guide general, we'll use the API and curl.

```

image::tutorials/user-actions/user-actions-add-webhook.png[Adding a new Webhook from your RequestBin.",width=1200px]

Scroll down and make sure that the [uielement]#user.action# event is enabled.

image::tutorials/user-actions/user-actions-webhook-switch.png[Ensuring that the user.action Webhook event switch is enabled,width=1200px]

Next, click on the [breadcrumb]#Tenants# tab and select the tenant the User Action will be associated with or select [uielement]#All tenants#.

image::tutorials/user-actions/user-actions-webhook-tenant.png[Enabling Webhook for Tenant,width=1200px]

Navigate to [breadcrumb]#Tenants -> Your tenant#, and select the [breadcrumb]#Webhooks# tab. Make sure that the webhook is enabled. If you selected [uielement]#All tenants# on the webhook page, this checkbox will be disabled.

image::tutorials/user-actions/user-actions-tenants-webhooks.png[Viewing the enabled webhooks on the Tenant page,width=1200px]

Scroll down and make sure the [uielement]#user.action# event is enabled here too.

image::tutorials/user-actions/user-actions-tenants-switch.png[Ensuring that the user.action Webhook event switch is enabled,width=1200px]

> == Executing the User Action

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Actioning the User
```

The [field]#expiry# time follows the UNIX epoch format in milliseconds. 

The [field]#userActionId# value is the Id you provided or the randomly generated one you recorded when creating the User Action. 

FusionAuth will reply with `200 OK`:

[source,json,title="Response after executing User Action"]
----
{
  "action": {
    "actioneeUserId": "12e22430-162c-4f7e-bf40-58f7a69a26ce",
    "actionerUserId": "5ea819ea-6ff1-4b17-943f-eb2d1c246c3b",
    "applicationIds": [],
    "comment": "Signed up for 24 hour premium access",
    "emailUserOnEnd": true,
    "expiry": 1674939392664,
    "id": "8ed1f910-4e62-4dd1-a88e-e45964b56e21",
    "insertInstant": 1674938412450,
    "localizedName": "Bought Temporary Access",
    "name": "Bought Temporary Access",
    "notifyUserOnEnd": false,
    "userActionId": "6f4115c0-3db9-4734-aeda-b9c3f7dc4269"
  }
}
----

In this example, when the action is executed, the `actionee` will receive an email thanking them for their subscription.

image::tutorials/user-actions/user-actions-email.png[Email confirmation from User Action event,width=1200px, role=bottom-cropped]

> == Querying Action Status on a User

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Querying Applied User Actions
```

* Check the subscription state of the Action for the User in FusionAuth from your site when the user attempts to log in.
* Use a webhook at the end of the Action to change the User's Role in FusionAuth and disallow that role in your site.
* Use a webhook at the end of the Action to call your code to create another temporal Action in FusionAuth with an indefinite end date and [field]#preventLogin# set to true.

The last option is probably the simplest and most idiomatic way to use FusionAuth in most cases. In fact, using an Action to prevent login is the most common use case for Actions.

=== Instantaneous Actions

An instantaneous Action instance has an Option that can be chosen from a list but no temporal states. Once you set the Action for a User, it either remains or is removed.

++++
{% mermaid %}
flowchart LR
    Added-.->Removed
{% endmermaid %}
++++

==== Survey Example

Let's take an instantaneous Action example where a user gives feedback on their interaction with customer support by assigning a rating and giving a comment.

> Assume you have already created an instantaneous Action named "Feedback" in FusionAuth, with Options of "Bad", "Neutral", and "Good". Your user chooses "Good" in your feedback form and enters the comment "Problem solved quickly". When the form is saved, your code will call the Action API and create an Action instance for the User with the option "Good", and populate the [field]#comment# field. The [field]#actioner# of the instance will be set to the support User who helped the customer.

Reviewer: Wouldn't the support User be the actionee? And the customer be the actioner?

== Part 2: A Tutorial Example Using Actions

The remainder of this guide will demonstrate a practical example of using Actions that you can follow. Let's start with a brief tour of the APIs that you'll use in the example.

== The Action APIs

Three separate APIs manage Actions. Each API has its own documentation.

* link:/docs/v1/tech/apis/user-actions[Actions] — Defines an Action, updates it, and deletes it. The API path is `/api/user-action`.
* link:/docs/v1/tech/apis/user-action-reasons[Action Reasons] — Defines the reason an Action is taken. The API path is `/api/user-action-reason`.
* link:/docs/v1/tech/apis/actioning-users[Action instances] — Applies an existing Action to a User, optionally with a Reason. Can also update or cancel the Action instance. The API path is `/api/user/action`.

Actions and Action Reasons can be managed on the FusionAuth admin UI. Only Action instances require you to use the API: You cannot apply an Action to a User on the website.

> It is faster to use FusionAuth API wrappers rather than make HTTP calls directly. You can read how to use API wrappers in the link:/docs/v1/tech/client-libraries/[client library guide] before continuing. This guide uses the TypeScript client library.

Reviewer: Please call them 'client libraries' not API wrappers.

** [field]#Email#: `admin@example.com`
** Disable [field]#Send email to set up password# to manually set the password.
*** [field]#Password#: `password`
*** [field]#Confirm#: `password`
* Save icon:save[role=ui-button blue,type=fas] the User.
* Register the User to the following Applications on the [breadcrumb]#Registrations# tab by clicking the [uielement]#Add registration# button.
** First registration:
*** [field]#Application#: `PiedPiper`
*** [field]#Roles#: `admin`
*** Save icon:save[role=ui-button blue,type=fas] the Registration
** Second registration:
*** [field]#Application#: `FusionAuth`
*** [field]#Roles#: `GlobalAdmin`
*** Save icon:save[role=ui-button blue,type=fas] the Registration

image::guides/user-actions/application-registrations.png[Create an Administrative User in FusionAuth,width=1200,role=bottom-cropped]

=== Create a Subscriber User (Actionee)

* Under [breadcrumb]#Users#, click the icon:plus[role=ui-button green,type=fas] button to add a User.
* Enter the values:
** [field]#Email#: `reader@example.com`
** Disable [field]#Send email to set up password# to manually set the password.
*** [field]#Password#: `password`
*** [field]#Confirm#: `password`

> ** [field]#Languages#: `Esperanto` (Note that you have to enter the text, wait for a popup to appear, then click it to confirm the entry.)

Reviewer: :)

* Save icon:save[role=ui-button blue,type=fas] the User.
* Click [uielement]#Add registration# under the [breadcrumb]#Registrations# tab to register the user to the "PiedPiper" application.
** [field]#Application#: `PiedPiper`
** [field]#Roles#: `customer`

image::guides/user-actions/reader-user.png[Create a Subscriber User in FusionAuth,width=1200,role=bottom-cropped]

Record the [field]#User Id# of both the Users you created to use later.

=== Create an API Key

> You now have an Application with two Users.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You now have an Application with two registered Users.
```

> To apply Actions using the API, we need to create an API Key. In reality, you should grant as few privileges as possible to an API Key (principle of least privilege), but you'll make a skeleton key in this tutorial to save time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To apply Actions using the API, you need to create an API Key. In reality, you should grant as few privileges as possible to an API Key (principle of least privilege), but you'll make a key with all privileges in this tutorial to save time.
```

** Save icon:save[role=ui-button blue,type=fas] the Reason.
* Add icon:plus[role=ui-button green,type=fas] the second Reason.
** [field]#Id#: `28b0dd40-3a65-48ae-8eb3-4d63d253180a`
** [field]#Text#: `Expired Subscription`
** [field]#Code#: `ES`
** Save icon:save[role=ui-button blue,type=fas] the Reason.

image::guides/user-actions/reasons.png[Create User Action Reasons in FusionAuth,width=1200,role=bottom-cropped]

==== Create Signup Webhook to Intercom

Since your Actions will rely on calling webhooks, you're going to create the webhooks first. Your first webhook will notify Intercom that a new user has subscribed and should be sent the onboarding series of emails that explain how to use all the paid features of PiedPiper. All our webhooks in this tutorial are sent to fake localhost versions of these real companies.

* Navigate to [breadcrumb]#Settings -> Webhooks# and add icon:plus[role=ui-button green,type=fas] a webhook.
** [field]#Id#: `55934340-3c92-410a-b361-40fb324ed412`
** [field]#URL#: `\http://host.docker.internal:3000/intercom`
** Scroll down and ensure that the [field]#user.action# event is enabled.
* Save icon:save[role=ui-button blue,type=fas] the webhook.

> image::guides/user-actions/create-webhook.png[Create a Webhook in FusionAuth,width=1200,role=bottom-cropped]

Reviewer: Why is the `Event` tab cut off? Seems like you'd want to show it.

* Under [breadcrumb]#Settings -> Webhooks#, click the icon:plus[role=ui-button green,type=fas] button to add a new webhook.
** [field]#Id#: `fa76b458-e0a0-438a-a5c8-26ca487e473e`
** [field]#URL#: `\http://host.docker.internal:3000/expire`
** Scroll down and ensure that the [field]#user.action# event is enabled.
* Save icon:save[role=ui-button blue,type=fas] the webhook.

==== Enable Webhooks in Tenants

* Navigate to [breadcrumb]#Tenants# and edit icon:edit[role=ui-button blue,type=fas] the "Default" tenant.
* Click on the [breadcrumb]#Webhooks# tab. Note that the two webhooks you just created are enabled in the checkbox list.
** Scroll down and enable [field]#user.action#.
** Save icon:save[role=ui-button blue,type=fas] updates to the Tenant.

[NOTE]
====
Enabling the webhooks in two places gives you fine-grained control across Tenants. More information on webhooks is available link:/docs/v1/tech/events-webhooks/#overview[here].
====

==== Create Subscription Action

Now you can create the subscription and banning Actions to apply to the user in our PiedPiper code. They're both temporal Actions.

[NOTE]
====

> You'll continue using the FusionAuth admin UI to create objects in this tutorial. If you think it would be faster in future to create Actions in code, see this previous https://fusionauth.io/blog/2023/04/20/using-user-actions#creating-the-user-action[guide] that demonstrates creating Actions in the terminal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You'll continue using the FusionAuth admin UI to create objects in this tutorial. You can also use client libraries and the API. Here's a link:/blog/2023/04/20/using-user-actions#creating-the-user-action[blog post which illustrates this functionality].
```

      const clientResponse = await fusion.actionUser(request);
      if (!clientResponse.wasSuccessful)
        throw Error(clientResponse);
      console.info('User banned successfully');
    }
    catch (e) {
      console.error('Error handling expiry: ');
      console.dir(e, { depth: null });
    }
  }
  res.sendStatus(200);
});
----

== Testing

In this last section, you'll see how Actions work by applying them and watching the emails and webhooks be triggered.

=== Start PiedPiper

Run the PiedPiper Node.js app by typing the following in a terminal.

[source,bash]
----
npm run start
----

=== Apply Subscription Action

Let's start testing by applying the subscription Action to the user. In reality, your app would do this in code once the user has paid, but for now we'll do it in a new terminal.

[NOTE]
====
You'll need to install `curl` if it's not already installed.
====

In the following code, you will replace the values of [filed]#actioneeUserId# and [field]#actionerUserId# with the values you recorded earlier for the reader and administrator users respectively.

> To test out the workflow, you can let the subscription expire after 60 seconds. From the https://fusionauth.io/dev-tools/date-time[FusionAuth Date-Time tool], copy the [field]#Milliseconds# value, add `60000` (60 seconds) to it, and paste it into the `"expiry"` field below. This will ensure the subscription action expires immediately. If you're on Linux, use the Option 2 code snippet to set the [field]#expiry# value automatically.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To test out the workflow, you can let the subscription expire after 60 seconds. From the https://fusionauth.io/dev-tools/date-time[FusionAuth Date-Time tool], copy the [field]#Milliseconds# value, add `60000` (60 seconds) to it, and paste it into the `"expiry"` field below. This will ensure the subscription action expires quickly. If you're on Linux, use the Option 2 code snippet to set the [field]#expiry# value automatically.
```

  --header 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  --data-raw '{
  "broadcast": true,
  "action": {
    "actioneeUserId": "9af67e9a-8332-4c06-971c-463b6710c340",
    "actionerUserId": "ac2f073d-c063-4a7b-ab76-812f44ed7f55",
    "comment": "Paid for the news",
    "emailUser": true,
    "expiry": 1690288205000,
    "userActionId": "38bf18dd-6cbc-453d-a438-ddafe0daa1b0",
    "reasonId": "ae080fe4-5650-484f-807b-c692e218353d"
  }
 }'
----

**Option 2:** Set the expiry automatically (remember to change the user Ids)

[source,bash]
----
curl -i --location --request POST 'http://localhost:9011/api/user/action' \
  --header 'Authorization: FTQkSoanK7ObbNjOoU69WDVclfTx8L_zfEJbdR8M0xu-jKotV0iQZiQh' \
  --header 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  --data-raw '{
    "broadcast": true,
    "action": {
      "actioneeUserId": "9af67e9a-8332-4c06-971c-463b6710c340",
      "actionerUserId": "ac2f073d-c063-4a7b-ab76-812f44ed7f55",
      "comment": "Paid for the news",
      "emailUser": true,
      "expiry": '"$(($(date +%s) * 1000 + 60000))"',
      "userActionId": "38bf18dd-6cbc-453d-a438-ddafe0daa1b0",
      "reasonId": "ae080fe4-5650-484f-807b-c692e218353d"
    }
  }'
----

> You should receive a 200 status code and a response that looks like the following.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You should receive a `200` status code and a response that looks like the following.
```
